# Air ambulance balance billing is banned in Florida

*Original URL: https://www.medicalbillersandcoders.com/blog/air-ambulance-balance-billing-is-banned-in-florida/*

---

Ambulance billing has been under the flak of both insurance companies and patients due to the high overhead cost for transportation. Many US states through a patient survey after an accident or under medical emergency think before calling an ambulance service. Either the patient prefers a taxi or other people help to drive in the patient. So the medical emergency transportation service now has a question to answer the high medical bills which have to be paid currently by the patient as the insurance company goes in for balance billing resulting in reduced calls for emergency.

Balance billing takes place under the conditions when the medical provider charges a certain amount for their service and the patient has been made responsible as the chargers are not covered by the insurance companies. Over the years ambulance billing is regarded as a costly effect on the finances of the individual as the patient’s insurance network leaves out the emergency and unexpected charges from the contract. Florida is one such state which has banned the balance billing but the ban won’t cover the Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) services.

Most families who go in for insurance companies think that by paying premiums and deductibles, private insurance consumers have a reasonable expectation that they and their families will be covered if a sudden need for emergency medical transportation is required. As most of the families are unaware of the simple fact that air and ground EMT services are considered as out-of-network expenses by insurance companies.  So if you use any of the following services then you have to pay thousands of dollars to the provider directly from your pocket.

The emergency vehicle organizations or government-run ambulance vehicle offices additionally assert the full cost of an emergency vehicle trip doesn’t add up to a level that would monetarily wreck families. While this might be doubtful with ground emergency vehicle administrations, considering the normal trek is charged at $1,000-$2,000, air rescue vehicle trips are plainly charging patients at levels that are exorbitant to even the most prosperous patients.

For instance, as of late the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals decided that a family, whose tyke was slaughtered in a fender bender, must pay an adjust bill of more than $17,000 to an air rescue vehicle organization – after the family’s safety net provider repaid the organization,  nearly $16,000 for the outing to the doctor’s facility.

While states, for example, Florida have attempted endeavors to shield payers from adjusting charging, their laws do little to bring down air rescue vehicle costs. This is on the grounds that under government law, air ambulances have a couple of confinements on the sum they can charge for rides. The Florida Ambulance Association, which principally incorporates ground rescue vehicle individuals, suggested the continuation of adjust charging for emergency vehicle administrations. Since repayment is beneath taken a toll, we don’t suggest that emergency vehicle administrations be avoided by adjusting charging as of now.

In some of the latest development air ambulance has caused some big troubles for the consumers. Air ambulance charge tends to be most dramatic but with growing out of pocket payment cost to families has also resulted in the costly affair for them.

Though ambulance billing has been facing the song for some time it’s bound that in the near future insurance company will bring the emergency bill under the coverage. Making way for costly [ambulance transportation billing](https://www.medicalbillersandcoders.com/speciality/ambulance-transportation-medical-billing-services.html). Though most of the bills coming for any ambulance service seemed directly directed towards the patient insurance company to pay a certain amount of it.

To help Primary Care physicians and groups of physicians for better reimbursement, the **Medical Billers and Coders**  **(MBC)** offers [medical billing services](https://medicalbillersandcoders.com/medical-billing-services.aspx) with a dedicated billing expert team. [Contact us](mailto:info@medicalbillersandcoders.com) today to [schedule a call](callto:888-357-3226) with our billing expert.